Week 11:
Social AI
COSC350/550
Artificial Intelligence
               Agenda




1   Social Cognition

2   Designing AI Solutions for Humans
Social Cognition
 Similar gesture, similar
actors, similar context...
...Yet, different meaning
            Last week we defined human cognition as
            "those processes by which the sensory input
            is transformed, reduced, elaborated, stored,
            recovered, and used" (Neisser, 1967)
Social
            Social cognition is "the set of mental
Cognition   processes required to make sense of others’
            actions and react appropriately to them"
            (Langton et al., 2000)
            Umbrella term referring to a wide range of mental processes required
            to perceive, process, and interpret social information
           Thoughts, Desires, Beliefs



Emotions
                                        Humans communicate their thoughts,
                        Intentions      desires, beliefs, intentions and
                                        emotions during social interactions
                                        through social cues
                                         Language
                                         Speech intonation
                                         Facial expressions
                                         Gaze
                                         Gestures
                                         ...
Is this process only happening
  with people's interactions?
          Let's watch a short video...
How would you summarise
 what you just watched?
             An experiment from 1944

             Demonstrating that human observers
             interpreted simple geometric shapes moving on
             the screen as rational agents having intentions,
             desires and beliefs
Heider and
             No need to have human features or display
Simmel       common human social cues
Experiment
             Claiming that humans have an "instinct for
             storytelling"

             This study shows how humans are incline to
             use their personal knowledge and experience
             of social interactions to explain events
          Psychology literature suggests that a
          precondition to correctly master social
          cognition is to understand that others have
          different minds
          i.e. different beliefs, desires, intentions and knowledge

Theory    This ability of understanding that others have
of Mind   different minds is known as Theory of Mind

          In humans, gradually developed during the
          first 3-5 years of life. Not available from birth!

          Let's see it in action...
What happened during
  this experiment?
Why does an AI unit cover
works on social cognition?
         Modern AI technologies are used by
         everyone

         It must be easy to use these AI technologies,
         the interactions must be natural
AI and   To achieve this objective, AI models must
Humans   make sense of human behaviour, as us
         humans we do with other human agents

         Knowledge from psychology and other
         social sciences helps to implement AI
         models capable of such skills
Designing AI Solutions
     for Humans
Successful and Insuccessful Social Interactions
                Sender: Generative Process



                Latent hidden mental states Xs of the sender generates observable social cues
                Y

                Recipient: Inferential Process
From a
Computational
Perspective     The observable social cues Y are sensed by the observer and the observer
                makes an inference Xis of the sender's mental state

                The inferred mental states may or may not be correct:




                Social AI technologies should minimise these errors to prevent poor levels of
                human-machine interactions
               Social AI
  A machine or artificial agent using Artificial
Intelligence to perceive, process, interpret and
          respond to social interactions
             AI agents' sensors can include noise that if not handled
             correctly may lead to unexpected behaviour
             It is important to design appropriate fallbacks


             AI algorithms do not perceive and interpret the world as we
             do. They are as good as the underlying models they are
             built upon
             The choice of models and techniques based on the given context is crucial


Social AI    The data used to train the models may be incorrect or
             include biases. Errors and biases may be learned by the AI
Challenges   agent and lead to wrong decisions
             Make sure that the data is free from "garbage"


             Understanding and predicting human behaviour is a
             complex endeavour… even for humans
             Literature in psychology and social sciences helps


             Less is more. A simple but effective solution is better than
             a complex and fancy but ineffective one
             Sometimes, an "illusion" of intelligence is enough
                                                An Experiment
Raza, S.A., Vitale, J., Tonkin, M. et al. An in-the-wild study to find type of questions people ask to a social robot providing question-
                                   answering service. Intelligent Service Robotics 15, 411–426 (2022).




                                                                                A Q&A social robot
                                                                                A social robot tasked to take
                                                                                questions from visitors during the
                                                                                university OpenDay

                                                                                The experiment recorded
                                                                                the visitors' queries and
                                                                                analysed them

                                                                                People asked the robot
                                                                                personal questions about
                                                                                its beliefs, preferences,
                                                                                opinions and emotions
                                                  Source: SprigerLink article
Examples context-unrelated questions


   Can you shake my hand?

   What's your favourite colour?

   What is the meaning of life?

   Tell me a joke

   Do you believe in God?
Why do these results matter?
               Of course, if we know which types of
               questions people would ask to the AI agent,
               we can build models that would predict them
It's not all   and correctly answer them
about          But that's not all... it is clear that for some
accuracy       questions we need to design a character for
               the AI agent
               We need to determine its favourite colour, preferences, opinions,
               beliefs... and a personality
               Answers to these questions are not found on the web!
           Agents designed for social AI solutions do
           not have to be only rational but also social

Not only   Social aspects include:
            Personality
rational    Identity (sometimes even branding)
            Design of the expected interactions
            Dialogs
            Behaviour
               A personality is identified as an essential
               components for the success of social AI
               solutions

               Users automatically attribute a personality
               (and beliefs, thoughts, ...) to social AI
Why a          themselves. If the social AI has a well
               defined personality we can limit the risk of
personality?   users attributing negative or undesired
               personality traits to them

               If the personality is in-line with the designed
               and intended experience, it will benefit the
               overall user experience with the system
               ... and help when the agent fails
                     Amazon Alexa



Alexa strives to be clever, relevant, and make the customer smile.
Alexa will respond to questions about herself, answer to "I love you,"
tell jokes, and even sing a song. Alexa’s humor shines through, but
never at the expense of efficiency. Performing the requested task
instantly and accurately is always her primary goal. Alexa is
approachable, efficient, trustworthy, and natural. These unique
personality characteristics make Alexa, Alexa.


https://developer.amazon.com/en-US/alexa/branding/alexa-
guidelines/communication-guidelines/brand-voice
                  Google Assistant


‘She comes from Colorado, a state in a region that lacks a distinctive
accent. “She’s the youngest daughter of a research librarian and a
physics professor who has a B.A. in art history from Northwestern,”
Giangola continues. When she was a child, she won $100,000 on
Jeopardy: Kids Edition. She used to work as a personal assistant to
“a very popular late-night-TV satirical pundit.” And she enjoys
kayaking.’


Isobel Hamilton (2018) Google gave Google Assistant a weirdly
specific backstory to get her voice just right
https://www.businessinsider.com/google-gave-google-assistant-a-
weirdly-specific-backstory-2018-10?r=DE&IR=T
            1   People attributes beliefs, desires,
                intentions, emotions and other mental
                states to machines and intelligent agents

            2   For a social AI solution, achieving high
Take-home       accuracy to correctly understanding and
                responding to social interactions is
messages        important but not sufficient
            3   An agent designed for a social AI solution
                must display social skills and those
                include the design of a personality,
                preferences, beliefs, etc.
AI is not only about math and statistics!
      The AI community also needs people from different disciplines:

     psychologists, social scientists, designers, artists, copywriters, ...
                                       Summary

Social Cognition
 Social cognition can be defined as the set of mental processes required to make sense of others’
 actions and react appropriately to them
 Mental states of human agents are expressed via social cues
 These social cues can be picked up by other social agents to infer the mental state of the social
 interaction partner
 This inference is not a phenomenon only applied to human-human interactions. Humans can
 attribute desires, intentions and beliefs to non-human agents
 Theory of Mind is a precondition for functional social cognition skills
 Knowledge from psychology and other social sciences is crucial to design appropriate AI solutions
 for humans
                              Summary (continue)

Designing AI Solutions for Humans
 A social AI agent can be defined as a machine or artificial agent using AI to perceive, process,
 interpret and respond to social interactions
 Computationally speaking, the hidden mental state X of an agent will generate observable social cues
 Y that can be observed by another agent to infer the hidden mental state X
 The inferred mental state may be correct or incorrect, thus contributing to the accuracy of the
 designed social agent
 Social AI agents use sensors to gather social cues and use actuators to respond with appropriate
 social cues and social interactions
 Challenges for social AI solutions include noisy sensors, inappropriate models, biased data, underlying
 complexity of social interactions, and the need of designing simple but effective solutions
 Accuracy is not enough, a social AI solution must also included the design appropriate social aspects
               Week 12: Trust, Privacy and Ethics in AI

               Recommended activities for Week 11:
                The textbook does not include the topics covered during this week.
What's next?    Simply refer to the slides and to the recommended readings for this
                week
                There are no workshop's exercises for this week but there are
                workshop sessions for internal students. Use them to work on the
                assignment and to ask assistance from your tutor.
                For any question, please use the forum or send me an email
